>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JUNE 18:
AS THE INVESTIGATION CONTINUES
IN ORLANDO, VICTIMS OF LAST
WEEK'S MASS SHOOTING ARE LAID TO
REST.
AND, INSIDE THE GROWING ECONOMY
OF THE WORLD'S LARGEST SYRIAN
REFUGEE CAMP.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
IN ORLANDO, IT IS A WEEKEND FOR
MEMORIAL SERVICES AND FUNERALS
FOR THE 49 PEOPLE KILLED IN THE
PULSE NIGHTCLUB LAST SUNDAY.
TODAY, 19 OF THE 53 SURVIVORS
SHOT BY OMAR MATEEN REMAIN IN
THE HOSPITAL, FOUR OF THEM IN
CRITICAL CONDITION.
THE F.B.I., WHICH TWICE
INVESTIGATED AND CLEARED MATEEN,
HAS SAID HE WAS NEITHER TRAINED
NOR DIRECTED BY ANY FOREIGN
TERRORIST ORGANIZATION.
BUT WE NOW KNOW MATEEN DECLARED
HIS ALLEGIANCE TO ISIS IN
FACEBOOK POSTINGS BEFORE HIS
ATTACK AND IN CALLS TO 9-1-1 AND
A LOCAL TV NEWS STATION DURING
HIS THREE-HOUR STANDOFF WITH
POLICE, WHO THEN KILLED HIM.
PRESIDENT OBAMA USED HIS WEEKLY
ADDRESS TODAY TO CALL FOR NEW
LAWS TO RESTRICT ACCESS TO THE
TYPE OF SEMI-AUTOMATIC RIFLE
MATEEN USED TO END AND TEAR
APART SO MANY LIVES.
>> BEING TOUGH ON TERRORISM,
PARTICULARLY THE SORTS OF
HOMEGROWN TERRORISM THAT WE'VE
SEEN NOW IN ORLANDO AND SAN
BERNARDINO, MEANS MAKING IT
HARDER FOR PEOPLE WHO WANT TO
KILL AMERICANS TO GET THEIR
HANDS ON ASSAULT WEAPONS THAT
ARE CAPABLE OF KILLING DOZENS OF
INNOCENTS AS QUICKLY AS
POSSIBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: THE SENATE IS
SCHEDULED TO VOTE MONDAY ON FOUR
GUN CONTROL PROPOSALS.
GAINING MOMENTUM IS A COMPROMISE
PROPOSED BY REPUBLICAN SUSAN
COLLINS OF MAINE THAT WOULD
OUTLAW GUNS SALES TO ANYONE ON
THE GOVERNMENT'S NO FLY LIST.
IN BELGIUM, FEARING AN IMMINENT
TERRORIST ATTACK, POLICE RAIDED
HOMES IN AND AROUND BRUSSELS
TODAY, INITIALLY DETAINED TWELVE
SUSPECTS, AND HAVE NOW CHARGED
THREE, RELEASING THE REST.
BELGIAN OFFICIALS SAY THE
SUSPECTS CHARGED WERE PLANNING
AN ATTACK IN BRUSSELS, LINKED TO
THE EUROPEAN SOCCER
CHAMPIONSHIPS IN NEIGHBORING
FRANCE.
THEIR TARGETS ALLEGEDLY INCLUDED
PLACES WHERE FANS GATHERED TO
WATCH BELGIUM'S MATCH TODAY WITH
IRELAND.
PRIME MINISTER CHARLES MICHEL
SAID THE COUNTRY WOULD REMAIN
EXTREMELY VIGILANT.
>> (translated): SO THE
MESSAGE THAT WE WANT TO PASS IS
ONE OF DETERMINATION, A MESSAGE
OF SERENITY, A MESSAGE OF CALM.
ALL THE SCHEDULED EVENTS IN THE
COMING DAYS WILL GO ON, WITH
ADDED SECURITY MEASURES.
>> Sreenivasan: BELGIAN
OFFICIALS DID NOT LINK TODAY'S
ARRESTS TO THE ISIS TERROR
ATTACKS ON THE BRUSSELS AIRPORT
AND A TRAIN STATION THREE MONTHS
AGO.
THE MAN ACCUSED OF MURDERING A
BRITISH MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT
MADE HIS FIRST COURT APPEARANCE
TODAY IN LONDON.
AUTHORITIES BELIEVE THOMAS MAIR
SHOT AND STABBED JO COX TO DEATH
ON A STREET IN BROAD DAYLIGHT ON
THURSDAY, BECAUSE OF HER
POSITION FOR THE U.K. TO STAY IN
THE EUROPEAN UNION.
IN COURT TODAY, MAIR GAVE HIS
NAME AS, "DEATH TO TRAITORS,
FREEDOM FOR BRITAIN."
FOLLOWING THE COX ASSASSINATION,
CAMPAIGN RALLIES FOR AND AGAINST
BRITAIN'S CONTINUED MEMBERSHIP
IN THE 28-NATION EUROPEAN UNION
REMAIN SUSPENDED
UNTIL MONDAY.
FOR MORE ON WHAT'S AT STAKE IN
THE REFERENDUM, I AM JOINED BY
"WALL STREET JOURNAL" REPORTER
JENNY GROSS.
SO, HOW-- NOW WE'VE HAD A COUPLE
OF DAYS.
HOW BIG OF AN IMPACT WAS THE
MURDER OF JO COX ON THIS WHOLE
PROCESS?
>> I THINK IT COMPLETELY CHANGES
THE GAME.
IN THE DAYS AHEAD OF THE MURDER,
THE POLITICAL RHETORIC HAD
GOTTEN INCREASINGLY INTENSE AND,
YOU KNOW, BITTER, INCLUDING
PERSONAL ATTACKS.
AND I THINK, YOU KNOW, EVERYONE
IS JUST SO DEVASTATED AFTER THE
MURDER OF JO COX, AND IT'S
DEFINITELY GIVEN A RESET TO THE
TONE.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU HAVE THE
POLLS SAYING ONE DIRECTION.
YOU HAVE THE ODDS-MAKERS GOING
IN A DIFFERENT DIRECTION.
IT SEEMS LIKE IT'S A BIT UP IN
THE AIR WHAT COULD HAPPEN ON
THURSDAY.
>> UP UNTIL LAST, WE THE POLLS
HAD SHOWN-- THEY WERE NECK AND
NECK, BUT THE JERMAINE SIDE HAD
BEEN GENERALLY A LITTLE BIT
AHEAD, BUT LAST WEEK A CHANGE,
AND THERE WERE SEVERAL POLLS
THAT PUT THE LEED SIDE AHEAD.
IT'S TOO SOON TO SAY WHAT IMPACT
THE TRAGIC DEATH OF JO COX WILL
HAVE ON THE REFERENDUM.
BUT FROM THE WORDS THAT THE MAN
ACCUSED SAID IN COURT TODAY
IT DEFINITELY SEEMS LIKE IT'S
SOMETHING THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN
POLITICALLY MOTIVATED, WHICH
COULD HAVE AN IMPACT ON THE
REFERENDUM IF HE'S-- I MEAN, THE
POLITICIANS NOW ARE FOCUSING ON
UNITY AND NOT DIVISIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ARE THE
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES?
SAY THE VOTE HAPPENS, AND
BRITAIN SAYS, "WE'RE GOING TO
LEAVE."
THERE IS NOT KIND OF AN
IMMEDIATE CHANGE ON FRIDAY.
IT'S GOING TO TAKE A WHILE.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
IT WILL TAKE SEVERAL-- IT COULD
TAKE SEVERAL YEARS TO
RENEGOTIATE THE U.K.'S
RELATIONSHIP WITH THE E.U., BUT
IT'S A HUGE POINT OF CONTENTION.
ON THE ONE SIDE, PEOPLE WHO WANT
THE U.K. TO STAY IN THE E.U.,
SAY IT'S GOING TO REEK ECONOMIC
CHAOS NOT ONLY TO MARKETS IN THE
U.K., AND E.U., BUT ACROSS THE
WORLD.
THE GOVERNMENT WILL HAVE LOST A
LOT OF MONEY AND WILL HAVE LESS
MONEY FOR PUBLIC SPENDING AND
PUBLIC SERVICES LIKE HEALTH
CARE.
IT WILL REALLY HIT BRITONS IN
THE POCKET.
THERE WAS A TREASURY REPORT THAT
SAID BRITONS WILL BE 4,,000
WORSE OFF.
PEOPLE ADVOCATING FOR BRITAIN'S
EXIT SAYS THE U.K. WILL BE MUCH
BETTER OFF ECONOMICALLY IF IT
CAN FORGE ITS OWN TRADE
RELATIONSHIPS WITH DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES LIKE BRAZIL OR CHINA
AND WON'T HAVE TO USE THE E.U.
AS A CONDUIT TO THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THE
MIGRANT CRISIS, AS A MATTER
OF FACT IT'S HAD ON THE EUROPEAN
UNION, AND BY EXTENSION INTO
BRITAIN.
>> I THINK ONE OF THE MAIN
REASONS PEOPLE WANT TO LEAVE THE
E.U. IS BECAUSE OF IMMIGRATION.
PEOPLE ARE CONCERNED ABOUT THE
FACT THAT THE U.K. ONLY HAS
LIMITED CONTROL OF ITS BORDERS
BECAUSE OF THE E.U..
ANYONE WITH AN E.U. PASSPORT CAN
LIVE OR WORK IN ANY COUNTRY.
THE U.K. HAS SEEN AN INCREASE
OVER THE YEARS.
THERE ARE PEOPLE IN SMALL TOWNS
THAT, YOU KNOW, HAVE A LOT OF--
THAT NOW HAVE SEEN A HUGE
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER,
PARTICULARLY EASTERN EUROPEANS,
AND THEY FEEL THAT ENGLAND IS
LOSING ITS SENSE OF ENGLISHNESS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
POLITICAL CONSEQUENCES HERE?
WHAT HAPPENS TO DAVID CAMERON IF
THE VOTE DOESN'T GO HIS WAY?
>> THERE ARE SO MANY UNKNOWNS IN
THIS, AND THIS IS ONE OF THE BIG
ONES.
IF THE VOTE DOESN'T GO HIS WAY,
A LOT OF EXPERTS AND POLITICAL
COMMENTATORS SAY THAT HE IS
GOING TO RESIGN, AND THAT LOOKS
LIKELY SINCE HE SAID HE WOULD
HAVE RESIGNED IF SCOTLAND VOTE
FORWARD INDEPENDENCE.
SO I MEAN, IT'S GOING-- IT WILL
PUT HIM IN A VERY STRANGE
POSITION BECAUSE HE HAS SPENT
MONTHS ADVOCATING THAT BRITAIN
STAYS IN THE E.U., AND THE
PEOPLE REJECT HIS VISION FOR THE
COUNTRY, THERE'S A LOT AT STAKE
FOR HIM AND HIS LEGACY.
>> Sreenivasan: JENNY GROSS OF
THE "WALL STREET JOURNAL," THANK
YOU FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK
>> Sreenivasan: EGYPT HAS
SENTENCED TO DEATH SIX OF ITS
OWN CITIZENS, INCLUDING THREE
JOURNALISTS, FOR PASSING
EGYPTIAN NATIONAL SECURITY
DOCUMENTS TO QATAR AND THE AL
JAZEERA NETWORK, WHICH IS
HEADQUARTERED IN QATAR'S
CAPITAL, DOHA.
TWO OF THE JOURNALISTS WORKED
FOR AL JAZEERA BUT WERE NOT IN
COURT.
THE COURT SAID DURING THE RULE
OF OUSTED PRESIDENT MOHAMMED
MORSI, THE DEFENDANTS LEAKED
DOCUMENTS TO QATARI INTELLIGENCE
THAT EXPOSED THE LOCATION OF
WEAPONS HELD BY THE EGYPTIAN
ARMED FORCES.
MORSI AND TWO OF HIS FORMER
AIDES WERE ALSO CONVICTED AND
RECEIVED 25-YEAR PRISON TERMS.
THE EGYPTIAN MILITARY DEPOSED
MORSI THREE YEARS AGO.
HE HAS BEEN SENTENCED TO DEATH
IN ANOTHER CASE, WHICH HE IS
APPEALING.
IN CALIFORNIA, FIREFIGHTERS HAVE
CONTAINED 25% OF A WILDFIRE THAT
HAS BURNED MORE THAN 7,000
ACRES.
FUELED BY 90 DEGREE TEMPERATURES
AND STRONG WINDS, THE BLAZE IN
SANTA BARBARA COUNTY HAS TRIPLED
IN SIZE SINCE IT BEGAN
WEDNESDAY, FORCING AUTHORITIES
TO SHUT DOWN A MAJOR FREEWAY THE
PAST TWO NIGHTS.
ABOUT 300 HOMES ARE CONSIDERED
AT RISK, CALIFORNIA FIREFIGHTERS
HAVE ALREADY FOUGHT MORE THAN
1,800 WILDFIRES THIS YEAR.
WILDFIRES HAVE ALSO BROKEN OUT
IN COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, AND
ARIZONA, WHERE TEMPERATURES ARE
EXPECTED TO NEAR A RECORD 120
DEGREES IN PHOENIX.
IN AN ACTIVE SHOOTER EMERGENCY,
COULD LIGHTS SAVE LIVES?
HEAR FROM THE LIGHTING DESIGNERS
DEBATING THIS ISSUE ON OUR
WEB SITE AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ONGOING
REFUGEE CRISIS IN EUROPE IS
FUELED MAINLY BY SYRIA'S CIVIL
WAR, BUT IT IS BEING FELT EVEN
MORE ACUTELY IN THE COUNTRIES
BORDERING SYRIA, TURKEY,
LEBANON, AND JORDAN.
ACCORDING TO THE INTERNATIONAL
ORGANIZATION OF MIGRATION,
JORDAN ALONE HAS TAKEN IN MORE
THAN 700,000 SYRIANS, NEARLY ONE
IN 10 PEOPLE LIVING IN JORDAN
RIGHT NOW IS A REFUGEE.
WHILE MANY SYRIAN REFUGEES ARE
IN NEED AND DEPEND ON JORDAN'S
GOVERNMENT FOR BASIC
NECESSITIES, SOME HAVE BECOME
ENTREPRENEURIAL IN ORDER TO
SURVIVE.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT AMY
GUTTMAN REPORTS FROM JORDAN.
>> Reporter: AN HOUR'S DRIVE
FROM JORDAN'S CAPITAL OF AMMAN,
THIS FAMILY-OWNED PASTRY SHOP,
CALLED FAROUK SWEETS, LOOKS LIKE
A TYPICAL MIDDLE EASTERN BAKERY.
CUSTOMERS STOCK UP ON PASTRIES
FOR THE WEEKEND.
IN THE BACK, FIVE BAKERS ARE
BUSY FILLING LARGE WEDDING
ORDERS.
WHAT'S UNUSUAL IS THAT THIS SHOP
IS INSIDE ZAATARI, THE LARGEST
SYRIAN REFUGEE CAMP IN THE
WORLD, SPREAD OVER THREE SQUARE
MILES OF DESERT.
OPENED BY THE JORDANIAN
GOVERNMENT AND THE UNITED
NATIONS IN 2012, ZAATARI LIES
JUST ACROSS THE BORDER WITH
SYRIA.
80,000 PEOPLE USED TO LIVE IN
TENTS AND NOW LIVE IN SHELTERS
MADE FROM CORRUGATED METAL
CONTAINERS CALLED CARAVANS.
WHEN THEY FIRST ARRIVED,
REFUGEES THOUGHT THEY WOULD BE
HERE A WEEK, MAYBE A MONTH. NO
EVEN THOUGH THEY'RE LESS THAN 10
MILES FROM HOME, REFUGEES HAVE
HAD TO RECREATE THEIR LIVES
HERE.
THAT MEANS FOR MANY, OPENING UP
SMALL BUSINESSES, JUST LIKE THEY
DID BACK HOME.
THE PASTRY SHOP IS ONE OF 3,000
BUSINESSES IN THE CAMP.
MANY LINE THE MAIN ROAD.
THERE'S A SUPERMARKET, A PIZZA
PLACE, A FALAFEL STAND, A
GARDENING SHOP, AND A STORE TO
RENT BRIDAL GOWNS.
ABUELMENA'EM ABU HESENIH AND HIS
FOUR BROTHERS OWN FAROUK SWEETS.
>> THERE IS GOOD OPPORTUNITY TO
WORK HERE.
THURSDAY, FRIDAY, AND MONDAY ARE
BUSIEST, BECAUSE AT THAT TIME,
THEY'RE CELEBRATING WEDDINGS.
>> Reporter: HIS FAMILY
ABANDONED THEIR CHAIN OF
BAKERIES WHEN THEY FLED THEIR
BESIEGED HOMETOWN OF DARAA, IN
SOUTHERN SYRIA.
TWO-THIRDS OF THE REFUGEES IN
ZAATARI ARE ALSO FROM THERE.
ABU HESENIH AND SOME TWO-DOZEN
RELATIVES HAVE OPENED FOUR SHOPS
INSIDE THE CAMP.
THEIR BUSINESS IS ABOUT
FINANCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL
SURVIVAL.
>> WE GET UP EVERY MORNING AT 6
O'CLOCK TO ESCAPE THE SITUATION
WE'RE IN.
WE HAVE TO WORK.
>> Reporter: THERE'S A LONG
HISTORY OF TRADE BETWEEN
JORDANIANS AND SYRIANS, CEMENTED
BY STRONG FAMILY TIES.
JORDANIANS HAVE PARTNERED WITH
SYRIAN REFUGEES PROVIDING THEM
CREDIT AND WHOLESALE SUPPLIES TO
START OVER.
IN ADDITION TO WHATEVER FUNDS
THEY BROUGHT WITH THEM, THE U.N.
PROVIDES REFUGEES VOUCHERS TO
PAY FOR COOKING AND HEATING GAS,
AS WELL AS $28 A MONTH PER
PER PERSON TO PAY FOR FOOD.
THAT'S $140 A MONTH FOR A FAMILY
OF FIVE.
THAT MONEY HELPS REFUGEES BUY
PRODUCTS FROM SHOPS IN THE CAMP.
THE MOST POPULAR ATTRACT LOCAL
CUSTOMERS FROM NEARBY TOWNS.
SOME JORDANIAN PARTNERS ARE EVEN
EXPORTING GOODS PRODUCED IN THE
CAMP.
>> JORDANIANS, THEY COME AND BUY
FROM HERE.
TAXI DRIVERS PICK UP SWEETS TO
TAKE OUTSIDE, AND ALL THE
SYRIANS THAT LIVE OUTSIDE THE
CAMP, FOR WEDDINGS, THEY MAKE
ORDERS AND PICK UP THEIR SWEETS
FROM HERE.
>> Reporter: ACCORDING TO THE
U.N. BUSINESSES INSIDE ZAATARI
GENERATE $13 MILLION A MONTH FOR
THE REFUGEES AND THE JORDANIANS
THEY DO BUSINESS WITH.
MOHAMMED KHAER AL JOKADAR OPENED
A BARBER SHOP IN THE CAMP TWO
YEARS AGO TO SUPPORT HIMSELF AND
14 RELATIVES WHO FLED SYRIA WITH
HIM.
>> EVER SINCE IT OPENED, I'VE
HAD CUSTOMERS AND BUSINESS HAS
BEEN OKAY.
NOBODY CAN GO WITHOUT A HAIRCUT.
IT'S LIKE WATER AND FOOD.
>> Reporter: AL JOKADAR AND HIS
FAMILY ARE FROM HOMS, PREVIOUSLY
SYRIA'S THIRD LARGEST CITY.
>> OUR HOUSE WAS DESTROYED, SO
FOR US, WE HAVE NOTHING LEFT IN
SYRIA.
>> Reporter: INITIALLY, AL
JOKADER AND HIS FAMILY SETTLED
IN AMMAN FOUR YEARS AGO, BUT HE
COULDN'T WORK LEGALLY OUTSIDE
THE CAMP THEN, SO HE MOVED TO
ZAATARI, WHERE THERE'S FREE
ELECTRICITY AND HOUSING AND
BETTER OPPORTUNITIES TO USE HIS
SKILLS.
>> WE NEED TO GENERATE AN INCOME
IN THE CAMP.
YOU CAN MAKE SOME MONEY.
>> Reporter: THE U.N. ALSO PAYS
SOME REFUGEES TO DO JOBS AROUND
THE CAMP.
AL JOKADER PAINTS MURALS ON
CARAVANS.
BEYOND THE CAMPS, IN JORDAN'S
CITIES, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
LOOSENED EMPLOYMENT RESTRICTIONS
ON REFUGEES AND IS INVESTING IN
INDUSTRIES SYRIANS ARE SKILLED
IN-- CONSTRUCTION, AGRICULTURE,
MANUFACTURING AND TECHNOLOGY.
OASIS 500, A JORDANIAN COMPANY
THAT MENTORS AND INVESTS IN TECH
STARTUPS, HAS RECRUITED SYRIAN
ENTREPRENEURS TO COME TO JORDAN
AND PARTICIPATE IN THEIR
MENTORING PROGRAM.
MOE GHASHIM WAS ONE OF THEM.
HE'S FROM SYRIA'S MOST
POPULOUS CITY, ALEPPO.
HE RAN HIS OWN WEB DESIGN AGENCY
WITH A DOZEN EMPLOYEES.
IT WAS SUCCESSFUL, UNTIL THE
WAR.
>> THINGS STARTED TO BECOME
UGLY BACK THEN IN SYRIA.
NO ELECTRICITY, NO INTERNET.
I COULDN'T WORK ANYMORE.
I SEARCHED FOR INCUBATORS IN
THAT WORLD.
A MAN WAS BASICALLY BUILDING
A LOT OF START-UPS.
>> Reporter: FIVE YEARS AGO,
WITH SEED MONEY FROM OASIS 500,
HE LAUNCHED SHOPGO, AN
E-COMMERCE PLATFORM HELPING
BUSINESSES IN THE REGION PROCESS
PAYMENTS, SOMETHING HE LEARNED
TO DO IN THE U.S. WHILE PAYING
HIS WAY THROUGH COLLEGE.
HE NOW HAS 300 CLIENTS.
>> WE'RE IN DUBAI, WE'RE IN
AMMAN, WE ARE NOW SUBCONTRACTING
OTHERS.
WE HAVE SUBCONTRACTORS IN THE
U.K., SUBCONTRACTORS IN THE U.S.
YEARS AGO I JUST WANTED $10,000,
THAT WAS IT, TO SURVIVE.
WE RAISED OVER $3 MILLION IN
FUNDING SO FAR.
>> Reporter: 25 OF GHASHIM'S
EMPLOYEES ARE JORDANIAN, SEVEN
ARE SYRIAN.
THE INTEGRATED WORKFORCE IS
INTENTIONAL.
>> I'M VERY PROUD OF HOW WE'RE
TRYING TO WORK TOGETHER AS A
COMMUNITY.
THE TEAM WORKED WITH ME BROUGHT
THEIR FAMILIES HERE.
SOME OF THEM MARRIED JORDANIANS.
WE HAVE TO SURVIVE.
>> Reporter: TODAY, GHASHIM
LIVES IN AMMAN WITH AN OFFICE
OVERLOOKING AN UPSCALE SHOPPING
MALL, BUILDING A FUTURE FOR
HIMSELF, WHILE ALEPPO IS RAVAGED
BY WAR.
>> I FEEL I'M JUMPING BETWEEN
THESE TWO LIVES, BETWEEN TWO
MOVIES, DO THINGS THAT YOU CAN'T
RELAY.
I DON'T BELONG TO THIS PLACE,
BUT TECHNICALLY I DO.
>> Reporter: UNLIKE GHASHIM, NOT
EVERY SYRIAN REFUGEE HAS THE
SKILLS, THE CAPITAL OR THE
CONNECTIONS TO SUPPORT
THEMSELVES.
JORDAN'S GOVERNMENT CONTENDS
REFUGEES ARE DEPLETING A
QUARTER OF ITS ANNUAL BUDGET,
DRAINING RESOURCES LIKE WATER
AND OVERCROWDING HOSPITALS AND
SCHOOLS.
IN MAFRA, THE CITY CLOSEST TO
THE REFUGEES CAMP, THE
POPULATION HAS DOUBLED TO
200,000.
THE HAI AL DUBAT SCHOOL FOR
GIRLS HAS SHORTENED CLASS
TIMES AND LENGTHENED SCHOOL DAYS
TO ACCOMMODATE SYRIAN CHILDREN.
JORDANIAN KIDS COME IN THE
MORNING, AND SYRIANS IN THE
AFTERNOON.
ALIA AKU SHAYDAH IS THE
PRINCIPAL.
>> SOMETIMES THE JORDANIANS
FEEL THAT THE SYRIANS ARE
COMING IN AND TAKING THEIR
SEATS, THEIR DESKS.
>> Reporter: NATIONWIDE, 50,000
SYRIAN CHILDREN ARE ON WAITING
LISTS TO ATTEND JORDANIAN
SCHOOLS.
IN ADDITION TO DOUBLE SHIFTS,
AKU SHAYDAH SAYS SHE AND HER
STAFF ARE DEALING WITH MANY
SYRIAN KIDS TRAUMATIZED BY WAR.
>> THEY WERE VERY AGGRESSIVE AT
FIRST.
THEY WERE VERY VIOLENT, AND THEY
WOULD BREAK THINGS-- BENCHES,
WINDOWS.
BUT NOW THEY ARE A LOT CALMER.
WE ARE PATIENT WITH THEM.
>> Reporter: JORDAN IS COMMITTED
TO EDUCATING REFUGEE CHILDREN,
SAYS IMAD FAKHOURY, JORDAN'S
MINISTER OF PLANNING AND
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION.
>> WE IN JORDAN, FOR EXAMPLE,
VERY EARLY ON BELIEVED THAT WE
CANNOT AFFORD TO HAVE A LOST
SYRIAN GENERATION.
SYRIAN BOYS AND GIRLS THAT DON'T
GO FOR SCHOOLS FOR 5, 6, 7, 10
YEARS.
THEY'LL BE LEFT VULNERABLE TO
RADICALIZATION.
>> Reporter: JORDAN HAS RECEIVED
$1.5 BILLION FROM THE
EUROPEAN UNION, WITH ANOTHER
$4 BILLION IN INTERNATIONAL AID
PLEDGED TO HELP SYRIAN REFUGEES.
MINISTER FAKHOURY BELIEVES THE
EU IS ESSENTIALLY PAYING JORDAN
TO KEEP REFUGEES IN JORDAN.
>> THE REALITY IS WE ARE AT A
SATURATION POINT.
WE ARE FATIGUED AS A NATION.
YOU CAN COUNT ON A COUNTRY LIKE
JORDAN TO DO THIS FOR FIVE
YEARS, BUT THIS IS THE SIXTH
YEAR.
THERE'S NO END IN SIGHT.
IT WILL TAKE YEARS BEFORE THE
REFUGEES CAN GO BACK SAFELY.
ENOUGH IS ENOUGH.
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
NEEDS TO DO MUCH MORE.
YOU CAN'T WAIT.
IT COSTS YOU TEN TIMES OF WHEN
THE REFUGEES GET TO EUROPE.
SO WHY NOT DO MORE FROM THE HOST
COUNTRY'S POINT OF VIEW?
>> Reporter: FAKHOURY
BELIEVES MORE AID IS NEEDED TO
FULFILL THE IDEA THAT IF THE
LIVES OF SYRIAN REFUGEES IMPROVE
IN JORDAN, THEY'LL BE LESS
LIKELY TO MIGRATE TO EUROPE.
>> WE'RE VERY INTERESTED THAT
THE SYRIANS REMAIN CLOSE TO
THEIR COUNTRY, THEY WILL HAVE
THE CHANCE ONE DAY TO GO BACK
AND BUILD IT AND RECONSTRUCT IT.
>> Reporter: THAT'S EXACTLY WHAT
ABUELMENA'EM ABU HESENIH AND HIS
BROTHERS WANT TO DO ONCE THE WAR
ENDS.
>> RIGHT AWAY, WE GO BACK, AND
IN THIS PLACE, WE'LL SELL, BUT
WE WILL NOT STAY HERE A MINUTE
LONGER.
>> Sreenivasan: IN JORDAN'S
ZAATARI REFUGEE CAMP, A SYRIAN
PHOTOGRAPHER WANTS TO HELP OTHER
REFUGEES TELL THEIR STORIES
THROUGH ART.
READ MORE AT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA
PLANS TO CUT THE 10,000 U.S.
TROOPS IN AFGHANISTAN ALMOST BY
HALF BEFORE HE LEAVES OFFICE
NEXT JANUARY.
BUT THIS WEEK, THE U.S.-LED NATO
ALLIANCE APPROVED A PLAN TO KEEP
BASES OPEN AND A TROOP PRESENCE
IN AFGHANISTAN WELL INTO NEXT
YEAR, IN PART TO TRAIN AND EQUIP
AFGHAN FORCES.
THE DEBATE OVER THE MILITARY
MISSION, NOW IN ITS 15th YEAR,
COMES AT A TIME WHEN THE AL
QAEDA-ALLIED TALIBAN CONTROLS
MORE TERRITORY IN AFGHANISTAN
THAN AT ANY TIME SINCE THE U.S.
INVASION DEPOSED THE GROUP AFTER
9/11.
JOINING ME NOW FROM WASHINGTON
TO DISCUSS THE NATO AND U.S.
TROOP COMMITMENTS IS REUTERS
REPORTER PHIL STEWART.
PHIL, HOW MUCH OF THIS IS FACING
THE REALITY THAT THE TALIBAN ARE
AS STRONG AS THEY ARE,
REGARDLESS OF HOW MANY TROOPS WE
HAVE IN THERE?
>> THAT'S EXACTLY IT.
I THINK WHAT'S HAPPENING RIGHT
NOW IS THERE'S A RECOGNITION
THAT THE TALIBAN ARE MUCH
STRONGER THAN PREVIOUS
ASSUMPTIONS AND THAT THE UNITED
STATES AT SOME LEVEL HAS TO
REMAIN IN THE COUNTRY, PROBABLY
AT A STRONGER LEFT THAN IT HAD
THOUGHT.
CERTAINLY, OBAMA'S ALREADY
UPENDED SOME OF HIS PLANS THAT
WOULD HAVE SEEN THE UNITED
STATES GOING TO AN EMBASSY-BASED
PRESENCE STARTING NEXT YEAR.
THAT'S NO LONGER IN THE CARDS.
WHAT WE'RE LOOK AT NOW IS HOW
MUCH OF A NATO PRESENCE IS
REALLY NECESSARY AND HOW MUCH
CAN REALLY HELP AFTER SO MANY
YEARS OF WAR AND SO MANY YEARS
OF MILITARY ENGAGEMENT HAS
FAILED TO REALLY POLLSTER THE
N.S.F., THE AFGHAN NATIONAL
SECURITY FORCES, TO THE DEGREE
PEOPLE HAD HOPED.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT ANY
POTENTIAL ON THE DIPLOMATIC
FRONT?
THAT SEEMS TO HAVE KIND OF
FIZZLED AWAY.
JUST A COUPLE WEEKS AGO, REIN,
WE WERE REPORTING A KEY LEADER
OF THE TALIBAN HAD BEEN KILLED
AND A NEW ONE HAD BEEN ORDERED
TO REPLACE HIM.
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT.
I THINK THERE WAS SOME TALK
INITIALLY AFTER THE U.S. DRONE
STRIKE ACROSS THE BORDER FROM
AFGHANISTAN, JUST INSIDE
PAKISTAN, AGAINST THE LEADER OF
THE AFGHAN TALIBAN.
AND WHEN THAT LEADER OF THE
TALIBAN WAS REMOVED, SOME PEOPLE
THOUGHT MAYBE IT WOULD BE GOOD
FOR PEACE TALKS.
MAYBE IT WILL BREATHE NEW LIFE
INTO THESE KIND OF MORIBUND
PEACE EFFORTS.
BUT, REALLY, IT HASN'T
MATERIALIZED.
SERIOUS THINKERS IN AFGHANISTAN
DON'T THINK THERE'S GOING TO BE
ANY NEW PEACE EFFORT ANY TIME
SOON, AND THE NEW LEADER OF THE
AFGHAN TALIBAN HAS ALL BUT RULED
OUT ANY ENGAGEMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: NATO
REFERENCED CONNECTION TO THE
REFUGEE CRISIS.
IF THEY START TO DESTABILIZE
FASTER, THOSE REFUGEES COULD
FIGURE OUT A WAY TO GET TO
EUROPE.
>> I THINK THE MIGRATION ISSUE
HASN'T BE UNDERESTIMATED IN
EUROPE RIGHT NOW.
IT'S THE TOP CONCERN.
IT'S THE TOP ISSUE.
YOU SAW THE BRITISH DEFENSE
SECRETARY FALLON BRINGING THIS
UP THIS WEEK IN BRUSSELS.
I WAS THERE AND HE WAS MAKING
THE CONNECTION BETWEEN EUROPE'S
MIGRATION CONCERNS AND THE
AFGHAN CONFLICT AND SAYING IF
THERE WAS A COMPLETE COLLAPSE IN
AFGHANISTAN, THAT YOU COULD SEE
ANOTHER INFLUX.
AFTER SEEING A FAILED STATE IN
SYRIA, THE FALLOUT FROM THAT
CONFLICT, THE LAST THING EUROPE
WANTS IS ANOTHER INFLUX OF
MIGRANTS, REFUGEES, AND THEY'RE
REALLY SAYING THIS IS A GOOD
INVESTMENT TO MAKE NOW.
LET'S STAY THE COURSE.
LET'S NOT WALK AWAY FROM
AFGHANISTAN.
THE QUESTION IS WHAT WILL HAPPEN
BETWEEN NOW AND THE SUM OR
BETWEEN NOW AND THE BEGINNING OF
NEXT YEAR?
BOTH THE U.S. TROOP PRESENCE
AND THE COMMITMENT OF NATO
ALLIES, WHO APPEAR INCREASINGLY
READY TO STATE COURSE IN
AFGHANISTAN DESPITE SO MANY
YEARS OF ENGAGEMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW MUCH OF
THIS ENDS UP ON THE NEXT
PRESIDENT'S DESK?
>> THAT'S EXACTLY RIGHT, YEAH.
I MEAN, WHOEVER GETS ELECTED
NEXT YEAR IS IT GOING TO BE
INHERITING A VERY LONG WAR THAT
SHOWS NO SIGNS OF ENDING.
AND THE AFGHAN SECURITY FORCES,
DESPITE SOME IMPROVEMENTS AND
THE MILITARY COMMANDERS ARE
TALKING ABOUT THOSE
IMPROVEMENTS, STILL FACE A VERY
RESILIENT, A VERY TROUBLESOME
TALIBAN ENEMY.
LAST YEAR, THERE WAS A REPORT TO
THE PENTAGON, GAVE A REPORT TO
CONGRESS THAT SHOWED CASUALTIES
AMONG THE AFGHAN SECURITY FORCES
SPIKED 27% LAST YEAR AND THEIR
AIR FORCE IS STILL A LONG WAY
FROM BEING CAPABLE, DESPITE
GAINING AIRCRAFT AND HAVING REAL
PROGRESS IN SOME AREAS OF THE
AFGHAN MILITARY.
THEY'RE A LONG WAY FROM BEING
ABLE TO DO THIS ON THEIR OWN.
I THINK WHATEVER HAPPENS BETWEEN
NOW AND WHEN PRESIDENT OBAMA
LEAVES OFFICE, THERE WILL BE A
LOT LEFT ON THE PLATE OF THE
NEXT PRESIDENT AT ANY FORCE
LEVEL.
>> Sreenivasan: PHIL STEWART
FROM REUTERS.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: IN SURVEYS OF
THE GREATEST ROCK & ROLL SONGS
OF ALL TIME, LED ZEPPELIN'S 1971
RECORDING OF "STAIRWAY TO
HEAVEN" IS USUALLY NEAR THE TOP.
BUT THIS WEEK IN A FEDERAL COURT
IN LOS ANGELES, A JURY BEGAN
HEARING EVIDENCE AND TESTIMONY
ABOUT WHETHER THE BAND MAY HAVE
LIFTED PART OF THE SONG FROM A
MORE OBSCURE GROUP.
THE NEWSHOUR'S PHIL HIRSCHKORN
HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: THE OPENING,
ACOUSTIC GUITAR CHORDS TO
"STAIRWAY TO HEAVEN" ARE
INSTANTLY RECOGNIZABLE TO
CLASSIC ROCK FANS.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE BAND
SPIRIT ALLEGE THE GENESIS OF
THAT PASSAGE IS THIS
INSTRUMENTAL, CALLED "TAURUS,"
RELEASED THREE YEARS EARLIER.
AT STAKE IN THE TRIAL IS THE
REPUTATION OF ONE OF ROCK'S
SEMINAL BANDS, AND MILLIONS OF
DOLLARS.
THE ESTATE OF SPIRIT SONGWRITER
RANDY WOLFE, WHO DIED IN 1997,
IS SEEKING SONGWRITING CREDIT
AND ROYALTIES.
THE PLAINTIFFS SAY LED ZEPPELIN
MAY HAVE HEARD TAURUS WHEN THEY
PLAYED AT THE SAME CONCERTS WITH
SPIRIT IN THE LATE 1960s,
BUT LED ZEPPELIN GUITARIST JIMMY
PAGE TESTIFIED THOUGH HE OWNS
SPIRIT ALBUMS, HE NEVER HEARD
THE SONG UNTIL TWO YEARS AGO,
WHEN THE SUIT WAS FILED.
>> WELL, LOOK, IT IS
FRUSTRATING.
>> Reporter: THE JURY IS NOT
EXPECTED TO HEAR EITHER BAND'S
ACTUAL RECORDINGS, BUT ONLY A
MUSICIAN PLAYING COPYRIGHTED
SHEET MUSIC.
>> I USED TO BE BETTER LOOKING
THAN THIS.
>> Reporter: LED ZEPPELIN HAS
BEEN ACCUSED BEFORE OF COPYRIGHT
INFRINGEMENT FOR OTHER BIG HITS
LIKE "DAZED AND CONFUSED" AND
"WHOLE LOTTA LOVE," SETTLING
THOSE CASES BY SHARING
SONGWRITING CREDIT AND
PAYING ROYALTIES.
WITH RADIO PLAY, STREAMING AND
SALES, A PLAINTIFF'S EXPERT
TESTIFIED ROYALTIES FROM
"STAIRWAY TO HEAVEN" IN THE PAST
THREE YEARS ALONE WERE $60
MILLION.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY,
ANOTHER BABY WITH A GRANDPARENT
RUNNING FOR PRESIDENT.
FORMER FIRST DAUGHTER CHELSEA
CLINTON GAVE BIRTH TO A BOY
SHE AND HER HUSBAND HAVE NAMED
AIDEN.
HILLARY AND BILL CLINTON SAID
THEY'RE THRILLED TO BE
GRANDPARENTS AGAIN.
CHELSEA AND HER HUSBAND ALSO
HAVE A 21-MONTH-OLD NAMED
CHARLOTTE.
IN MARCH, PRESUMPTIVE REPUBLICAN
NOMINEE DONALD TRUMP'S DAUGHTER
IVANKA GAVE BIRTH TO HER THIRD
CHILD AND TRUMP'S EIGHTH
GRANDCHILD.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.